so although we only included a single
statement in each of the try blocks that
we've use so far we could see an example
of that on line 43 we've just got the
return s nextInt you can
actually write many lines of code in
a try and similarly the catch block
contains as much code it can contain as much
code as you need to handle the exception
including attempting to recover from it
if that's appropriate for that
particular bit of code but let's take a step
back and answer question what is an
exception now the Java documentation defines
an exception as an event which
occurred during the execution of a
program that disrupts the normal flow of
the program's instructions so I guess
that could be summarized more simply as
something went wrong somewhere which is
possibly a more useful definition
because it leads more naturally to two
very important questions a. what went
wrong? and b. what can we do about it?
so exception and runtime exception are classes
defined in Java.lang and the
different types of exceptions that can be
called a sub classes of one of these two
exceptions so normally when catching an
exception you'd specified which subclass of
the exception to catch and we saw that
earlier with this code on
line 43 when we caught the input
mismatch exception with the invalid integer so
we could just catch
exception but it's really a good idea to
be more specific and catch the
specific exception rather just generalizing
catching sort of the catch-all catch so
to speak with exception so in other
words we could have change the code to
just be that and that will work fine but its very
generic and we are not being specific enough
and it can be useful to actually be
specific and you see I'll be talking
more about that
later on so the type of exceptions thrown
answers the question what went wrong so that's
the other reason one good reason to use that
and you can see on line 45 we know that at a
glance oh ok there's an input
mismatch and that's because the
exception is being named to really make us understand the type of errors that's been encountered in the
program so when a code got an input
mismatch exception we can then decide
what to do about it so as it
happened the code didn't do very much you
know any invalid input just resulted in
zero being returned now this could be a
reasonable response in some situations
but in others calling method might need to
know if there was a problem rather than
effectively being told that the user
entered the number 0 which is what we
did here so to let the calling method know
there was problem the code could
have thrown the exception what that
means is passing the exception back to
the calling method so once again these
things are probably best explained
examples so far we've created a
method to perform division and another
method to get the number from the user
so by putting them both in the same program
we can look at how exceptions propagate
after call stack and also explain what
that means what call stack actually means as well
now we don't need the LBYL code and
will start without handling any exceptions
just so we can see how Java handles
things the main method is gonna call
divide which will call getInt twice to get
the two numbers X&Y so this is getting a bit messy so
what I might do is create another bit of Java
class so will put a new one in and calls this example and
lets type this in.....
...and that
method.....
....
.....
......pretty simple
program there
...and run it first just to make sure that
works
...so we do 10 second one 5 10/5 is 2 so x is 10 and y is 5 so that is
obviously working correctly but if we run it again and do it in the other way round.... 5 divided by 10 is 0 again
because we're using integer division here but
there are two exceptions that could
happen in this program so just demonstrate that firstly if we just try and
divide by 0 so....notice
the error their is arithmetic exception
divide by 0 and if we run again and instead of a
number put something else we get a
different exception we get an input
mismatch exception so as expected
we got an error because we saw that in the
previous video and Java automatically
prints a stack trace which is showing
the call stack so the call stack is a
list of all the methods all the method
calls at any particular point in a
program's execution now in this case it's
all the method calls at the point where
the program crashed so each thread of
execution has its own call stack and the
thread is shown as the first line of the
stack trace and here its our main thread
so every time a new method is called it's
actually placed onto the stack and when a
method returns its then removed from the
stack so here we can see that the
exception happened in line
864 in the throw for method of Java.util.Scanner throwfor I should say so we will have a
look at throwfor in a minute but our code didn't call it so it
doesn't make much sense to us yet the
next item on the stack is scanner.next we didn't also call that either directly
so in fact the best approach to make sense
of these traces is generally to start at
the bottom and then work back up so our first code which is on line 11 is the first
item relates to our Code of so its obviously is the com.timbuchalka.example.main
so line 11 in example is the first item
that relates to our code and line 11 is
where the divide method was called and the
trace shows that it
happened in Example.java so the next
entry is line 16
in example.divide and that's where getInt was called and then the next one
after that is on line 25 of getInt so
normally it would stop there because all the
entries above that are also out of our
code in Java.util.scanner
class now we know that our attempt to
get an integer from the keyboard failed
and we should do something to prevent
that error from crashing the program
but carrying one through the stack at
the moment because it's useful to see
just how to trace errors through different
classes and packages so up until this
point IntelliJ has created links to the
line numbers where they appear in the code in
the editor so the links appear in blue as you
can see on the screen there in the stack
trace and you can click it to be taken to that
line of code so for example we can just
click on this one and we get taken to that line of code you can see the cursor moved and likewise if click here we get back to
line 11 so once the trace leaves that code
they may still be links but they are in gray
as you can see the first one where it says Scanner.java.2076 its in gray rather than
the blue and that is of course if
you using these IntelliJ them it might be
different if you themed your IntelliJ
installation separately so next we have
looking up the call stack on line 2076 Scanner.java
so click on the link for that and I'll just move this over
so we can see a little bit more fully
and IntelliJ has helpfully loaded the sources scanner and has taken us
to that line we could also control click
on the call or command click to next int
on line 25 back in the code to do the same
thing so the scanner nextInt method has
been overloaded which is why their seems
to be 2 calls in the stack trace you can
see these calls here 2076 and 2117 and our calls are passed on to
nextInt(defaultRadix) as you can see their so we
click on that
again and do a command click and do a control if your on a linux or windows that takes us to that method
and we get to the overloaded next int
method so that entries is call to next as you can see and
looking up here the next call then goes
to scanner.java
line 1485 so if you wanted to you can come back here click on the
scanner.java 2117 and notice the input
mismatch exception that gets thrown and then
come back here to next ther is a throw for
there and that's the code that's been
executed here so we can click on that then
line 864 following that through and
ultimately the input mismatch exception
on line 864 is we're it actually throws a
new input mismatch exception so quite
often the exception will be thrown from
the method that had the problem but as
you can see the scanner class uses the throwfor method to throw either a
mismatch exception or a np such element exception as you can
see here so depending on what the
problem was
it's thrown one of two different
exceptions so we are going to be talking more
about throwing exceptions later but for now I'm gonna concentrate what happens
when once thrown and how to handle
them so I said that exceptions are
subclasses of the exception class and
exception itself actually extends
throwable so will trace the classes back
in a minute to see this but at this point
you just really need to know that the
throwable constructor fills in the stack
trace for the exception so line
864 that you can see on the screen for Scanner.java
creates a new input mismatch exception
object that contains the current stack
trace so when the exception itself has
thrown the Java Runtime then looks to
see what you know what can handle it so
it does that by working it back up the
call stack so each method on the stack gets
the exception if it doesn't handle it
than the exception gets passed on to the
previous method on the stack and so on
so the exception is set to propagate the
call stack it keeps getting passed to
the calling methods until their is one that
actually can handle the exception so
looking at the way the stack trace is
printed
it might make more sense to talk
about propagating down the call stack
but stacks tend to be implemented growing
downwards so we talked about going back
up the stack
eventually if nothing handles the
exception in the the main Java entry
point just prints the stack trace and
the Java Runtime terminates and that's
what actually happened here to the right hand side of the screen so in a minute we are gonna modify the program to
catch the exception but first let's
continue backtracking to see the
exception class hierarchy so from line 864
of the scanner class we are gonna click on
input mismatch exception so doing command
click but do control click if necessary
click on that and you see we are now
in the input mismatch exception constructor
and as classes go here you can see its pretty
basic theirs 2 constructors and each one just delegates
immediately to the super but if we control
click on super
get to the base class no such element
exception it's just a sparse and in fact
exception objects are generally like
this
the subclasses exists to provide more
granularity so that code can check the
different types of errors by catching
the subclasses so we saw no such element
exception before its the other exception that the throw for method could throw so input mismatch exception
extends no such element exception and
exists purely to allow the exception
handler to differentiate between the
scanner running out of input and the
input being invalid so we can cause a no such
element exception in our program but this
video is getting a bit long so will start at looking at
doing that in the next video